So we've handled this case where we GET
/blog or /blog/ with a slash after it.
And now we're gonna need to do a little
bit more work to start handling automatic
file extensions.
So this being a static http server,
we need to actually figure out based on
the incoming requests file extension,
whether or not we should send
a particular content type or another.
So for example, for a PNG,
if we're getting a GET of a /blog.png,
we want to make sure that not
only do we open blog.png and
send those bytes from the file system
over, but we also wanna make sure
that we're sending back a content type
header that reflects this is a PNG.
Same thing with CSS and JS and all that.
So for example, we might wanna say, look,
let's see if the file extension
we're gonna kind of hand wave away.
Let's assume that we've gotten the file
extension cuz it's basically the same
exact parsing stuff that we did back in
part three, except that instead of looking
for spaces, we're looking for
dots and stuff like that.
So we're gonna kind of hand wave that away
cuz it's stuff we've already learned.
But we are gonna talk about some sort of
C-specific quirks that result once we've
already gotten the extension.
So let's say I wrote this code.
And I'm like, great,
I've got my extension, it's a string and
this is the memory address of a string.
I wanna say,
if extension double equals PNG,
the question is, under what
circumstances does this code run?
What do you think?
What has to be true about the program for
this to run?
Well, we might like it to be true
that if extension is the string png,
that's when this runs.
Unfortunately, that is not the answer.
That's the answer we hope we would get,
but it's not the answer we get.
The problem is, this is a number and
this is a number, so
this is gonna run when those two
numbers are the same number.
[LAUGH] In other words,
this is gonna run only if their memory
addresses are exactly identical.
It doesn't care about the contents
of the string at all.
It's not looking at
the contents of the string.
This is just doing two numbers and
comparing them to see if those
two numbers are the same number.
That is a problem,
because that is not what we want at all.
Now you would also hope that
taking this a step further, that
we could do a nice switch on this and say,
I would like to switch on the extension.
So this is a switch statement like you
find in many languages, case png colon,
then we would say, content type is
image/png, and then do a break,
just like we would in,
for example, JavaScript.
But once again, nope, these are two
numbers, [LAUGH] number, number.
And this is not gonna work unless we
happen to have exactly the same memory
address for those.
If you've ever heard of the concept of
reference equality versus value semantics,
this is exactly what's going on there.
Reference equality, basically,
is a fancy name for
the two memory addresses that
we're getting in identical.
Now, there is a way that we can do
this using a built in C function which
is called strcmp,
which is short for string compare.
And string compare will take the memory
address of two different null terminated
strings, and it will go one byte at
a time and keep going until either
the bytes are different or it reaches the
end of both strings, the null terminator.
And all of the bytes in between and
the two null terminators were identical.
And we're like, great, these two strings
are equal, and strcmp will return zero.
Otherwise it returns something non-zero
that tells you about which one's longer,
or different, or something like that.
But for our purposes, if we wanted
to do that, we would say, great,
if (!strcpm(extension "png")).
Now, this will actually
run when we hope it would.
We'll also say, great,
this is gonna run if whatever extension,
again, assuming that we've
already parsed it out,
is actually the bytes of that string or
[LAUGH] the bytes PNG.
Then we run this and set our content
type to image/png and all is good.
And then of course we wanna do the same
thing for the CSS and text/css.
We do that, and then JS, application
Javascript and HTML and text statement.
We're gonna do a lot of strcmp calls here,
which is a little bit unfortunate,
because strcmp is running through every
single byte in every single one of these,
which means that the more file
extensions that we support,
the more we are walking through
every single one of these.
So in order to detect if this was HTML,
we first had to go compare it to PNG and
let that fail, and
then compare it to CSS, let that fail.
Each time we're marching through
as much of this as we need to
until they're different.
It's kind of rough.
It's kind of a lot of comparisons there.
[COUGH] Now, what we're about to do,
I wanna give you a little
bit of a disclaimer.
I would not claim that
this is idiomatic C code.
I would say it is defensible C code.
If you're reading something like Postgres,
I bet you can find tricks like this in
Postgres, like the trick
that we're about to do.
But this is not something I would
normally expect for a static web server.
I'm doing it for a couple of different
reasons, but two reasons more than any.
One, it's faster, and
two, it's more ergonomic.
Also, I guess it's a way to give you
an example since this is a workshop of
demonstrating an interesting trick that
you can do in C that is a really good
example of how you can make C programs
go faster by doing some pretty heinous
C specific tricks that you would
just not find in any other language.
But it is gonna be a lot faster, and the
ergonomics are actually gonna be a little
bit better in terms of the getting to
actually use the switch statement.
So here we go.
We're gonna do a fancy trick now.
[COUGH] Here are some of these
file extensions we wanna support,
PNG, CSS, JS, and HTML.
So here are the bites
that correspond to HTML.
So H is 104, T is 116, M is 109, L is 108.
And here are the bits that go into HTML.
So if we have an array
of these four bytes,
this is what the bit pattern
looks like side by side.
You may recall all
the way back in part two,
we talked about how we get to
decide how we interpret memory.
These ones and zeros,
they are our ones and zeros.
We can look at them however we want.
In fact, if we want to, we can look
at these four bytes as one gigantic,
32 bit integer, if we want.
Same ones and zeros, we're choosing
to interpret that as an integer.
We can do that.
We're allowed to do that.
This is the particular
integer we have there.
It's 1,752,460,652,
which as everyone knows means HTML.
But I mean, really, it does, right?
If you think about it,
these are the ones and zeros.
We can interpret the ones and
zeros as either UTF-8 bytes, or
we can interpret them as this one number.
We're allowed to do either of those.
PNG, here are the ones and zeros for that.
We can almost interpret
this as a 32 bit integer,
except for the fact that it's not 32 bits.
We're actually eight bits shy there,
because png doesn't happen
to be enough bytes there.
But if we wanted to, we could just kind of
slap an extra zero byte on the end there,
and now we have another 32 bit integer.
That 32 bit integer is 1,886,283,520,
which as everyone knows means PNG.
Maybe you can kind of
see where this is going.
As long as we only need to care
about things that are four bytes or
fewer, we can treat these
things as integers.
JS will get another couple
extra bytes in there.
Now this is, again,
this is not standard operating procedure.
This is not how you normally do things.
This relies on a number of assumptions.
One, that we only care about file
extensions that are four bytes or fewer.
Two, that we're okay with all of this
padding nonsense with [LAUGH] backslash
zeros and whatnot.
And three, that we actually are okay with
reinterpreting these bits in memory as
integers when clearly they
are not originally integers.
But we can do it.
[COUGH] So if we did that and
we actually got them as 32-bit integers.
Hey, now the fact that switch wants to
match on two numbers is not a problem cuz
guess what, we have two numbers.
We got integers.
So if we want, we could just say, hey,
if the extension is stored as an actual
integer, and we are intentionally storing
it as an integer rather than the address
like we normally would for a string.
And we just said PNG is 1 billion, 800 and
whatever [LAUGH] million,
this would just work.
This would just straight up work.
And basically we would need
to do this cast thing.
So we would say, okay, this is a memory
address and basically, this part is
saying cast it, that is like treat
the extension as if it is an int address.
In other words, the address into
a 32 bit integer as opposed to
the first byte at a multi-byte string,
which we've seen before.
And then there's this extra star,
which basically means,
now that I've said I want to
interpret this address as a different
type of address, now just go ahead and
give me whatever's at that address.
So this turns it from
an address into an actual int.
So star parentheses,
whatever int star, basically means,
step one is convert the address into the
address of something else, and then step
two is now that I've said it's a different
type of address, go give me that thing.
You can also do bracket zero at the end.
We saw that technique before, that would
also work if you wanted to do the turning
it into the underlying thing that way.
But yeah, so now, as long as we're
okay with writing out these horrendous
constants like HTML = 1,752,000,000,
yada, yada, yada, this actually does work.
So, this is simultaneously a performance
improvement because now instead of having
to go one byte at a time, we get to use
the fact that the CPU can actually work on
entire four byte integers
in one single instruction.
You just be like, hey, are you this
integer, are you this integer,
are you this integer?
Done, much, much faster.
But also we're benefiting from
the fact that ergonomically,
we now actually get to use switch instead
of having to do if strcmp, if then strcmp,
blah, blah, else if then strcmp,
blah, blah, blah, blah.
This is definitely,
I would say, easier to read.
This part, not so much.
[LAUGH] This is just a bunch of nonsense.
[LAUGH] Obviously when you look
at code like this, you're like,
someone has been doing something that
they probably should not have been doing.
Also, by the way, in switch statements,
at the end you do have a default case,
which is basically like,
here's what we do as the fall through
if none of the above cases match.
So pretend we have the PNG and
HTML and JS and CSS and
all the other ones we wanna support.
The fallback here is basically saying,
if this is not an extension type that we
actually recognize and know how to handle,
default to application/octet-stream.
So some of the ones that we're not
gonna bother handling are .wff, so
WAF files for fonts, or WAF2.
Fortunately, fonts actually want
to be application/octet-stream,
which is very convenient
because WAF2 is 5 bytes.
So the fact that we don't need to handle
that one, [LAUGH] you just let that be
handled by the default case, works out
very well for our extremely hacky,
if everything is 4 bytes or
fewer turn it into an integer trick.
Okay, I do wanna note
by the way that these
numbers actually vary based on
the endianness of your processor.
Endianness is a Gulliver's Travels joke.
There's a whole history about what
this means and all that stuff.
We're not gonna get into it for this
workshop because it's not gonna come up.
Everybody's processor who's gonna be
using this workshop is gonna be the same
endianness, so it's not gonna matter.
But it is worth noting that
there are big endian and
little endian CPUs out there in the world.
And so theoretically that is something
you would need to worry about.
But for our purposes, we don't care,
it's not gonna come up.
But just so
if you wanna look that term up later,
you can kind of learn more about
how integers get represented and
some different CPUs that are more
exotic than what we're using here.
Okay, [COUGH] all right, so now let's
see if we can improve on this situation.
These hard coded numbers,
this is not gonna work.
I mean,
this is just a total obviously disaster.
Nobody would find this readable code.
This is just like, you'd have to do these
magical calculations ahead of time.
We can do better, fortunately.
And to do better,
we're gonna use bit shifts.
I promise this is not just an excuse
to learn about bit shifts,
we're actually gonna [LAUGH]
make use of them for real here.
Okay, so let's say that we have some
different like bit patterns here.
So we have four bytes here, and this first
one is zero, the second one is two, so
it ends in one followed by zero.
Second one is four, and
ends in four followed by 11.
And this last one is three, it ends in 11.
So then we have another bit pattern here,
and
these are basically shifted over by one.
So you can see that the one here
has been shifted over one position,
the one here has been
shifted over one position,
the one here has been shifted over
one position, and so has this one.
And basically,
this first bit that was here either
could be shifted off the end and just
discarded, and we add a zero at the end.
Or it could wrap around, which in
this case would be the same thing,
cuz this one happen to be a zero anyway.
So we can't really tell if it
wrapped around or was discarded and
an extra zero was added in.
But the point is that all
of this bits were shifted,
they shifted over one position.
Now that we performed this operation,
we can observe that we now have new
integer values corresponding
to each of these bytes.
So this one is still 0,
this one's now 4 because that's what
happens when you shift over by one.
This one's now 8 and this one's now 6.
Once more, if we bit shift one
more time over to the left,
here we have 0, 8, 16, and 12.
If you look at these numbers,
you might notice an interesting pattern.
Bit-shifting everything
to the left doubles them.
So this 2 becomes 4, and then if you bit
shift again, it becomes 8, 4 becomes 8 and
then becomes 16, 3 becomes 6 and
then becomes 12.
This is actually a performance
optimization that is
one of the things that the C compiler,
among many other compilers,
will do automatically for
you when it detects that it can.
So, as it turns out, doing an actual
multiplication instruction in the CPU is
significantly more expensive for
the CPU to do than a bit shift operation.
So what will happen is that
if the compiler detects that,
I see that you're multiplying by two or
a power of two, I will just silently turn
that into a bit shift of that many [LAUGH]
things, so that it can effectively do
the doubling less expensively than having
to do an actual multiplication thing.
Now there is a downside here when it
comes to overflow, which is that, hey,
what if the bit shift throws some of these
extra zeros off the end and discards them,
what then?
But actually, as it turns out,
C's multiplication does that too.
[LAUGH] So
you have the same problem either way,
it's just a question of
how it's gonna handle it.
But one thing to note about that is that
C's optimizer basically assumes that,
it likes to make use of what
it calls undefined behavior,
which is basically in the C specification.
It says multiplying two integers together
in C and then ending up with an integer
that's too big to fit in your bits,
which can absolutely happen.
If you have 32 bits here and you multiply
two sufficiently large numbers together.
For example,
all ones except one zero at the end here.
If you multiply those together,
you're gonna get a number that's
way too big to fit in 32 bits.
C says officially,
it is undefined behavior to do that,
which basically means that if you do that,
the C compiler is free to do absolutely
anything that it wants because it's
going to assume that that never happens.
So, make sure that that never happens,
programmer, and you're like, well, so
what happens?
Is it gonna segfaults or throw
an exception, or it's like, no, I not even
gonna tell you what's gonna happen, you're
just gonna find out, so don't do it.
Could be anything.
There's this old joke about undefined
behavior means that literally,
the C compiler is allowed to cause
goblins to fly out of your nose if you,
[LAUGH] multiply two numbers
that are too big together,
that's what undefined behavior means.
It means, literally, anything is allowed
to happen, including nasal goblins.
So it's like kind of like don't do it.
And part of the reason that it says that
is because it wants to be free to say
yeah, look, I wanna be able to do these
optimizations like turning multiplies by
powers of two into bit shifts,
which are faster.
But they're faster and they might have
slightly different behavior in terms of
overflow than the multipliers.
And so in order to get that performance
benefit, it needs to assume like,
yeah, it's just never gonna happen and
you need to be responsible for
making sure it doesn't happen.
Okay, now the reason we're learning
about bit shifts is because if we were
to take the bytes for h and
then the bytes for t and m and l, and
we were to bit shift them strategically.
And say, okay, we take this t and
we bit shift it over by 8 and
take the m over by 16 and
the l over by 24.
Sorry, and then we do a bitwise OR, which
is basically saying take all of these
bits and then if both of them are zero,
then the resulting one is also zero.
If either one of them is one,
then the resulting one is one.
And so this effectively means that all of
those bit shifts that are sort of adding
all those zeros at the end
sort of become harmless.
Essentially, what this does is it
causes us to end up with h, t,
m and l in exactly the array
like pattern that we want.
So h is gonna be first, and then t is
gonna be next, m is gonna be next,
then l is gonna be next after that.
And then if we call to int on that,
it's going to actually, sorry,
we could write a function called to int,
which we can call, passing these things,
which will just do the bit shifts for us.
And then what this will basically do
is this will turn these things into
an actual integer like we want.
So then ideally we would
like to be able to say,
instead of const int png equals
this horrendous, hard coded number,
we'd like to be able to call to int and
just say, look png/0 HTML, yada yada.
This is much more readable than this,
I think we can all agree.
It's not quite as readable as a string
literal, but I can clearly see, okay,
this one's the PNG one,
this one's the HTML one.
It's a lot harder to make a mistake, or
to detect that I've made a mistake than I
have if I have these weird,
hard-coded numbers here.